%\part{АНОТАЦІЯ}
\begin{center}
    {\normalfont \textbf{
    		АННОТАЦІЯ\\
    	Семенов А.К. Електрофізичні властивості багатофазних дисперсних систем.} -- Кваліфікаційна наукова праця на правах рукопису.}
\end{center}
\vskip 15pt

Дисертація на здобуття наукового ступеня кандидата фізико-математичних наук за спеціальністю 01.04.02 -- теоретична фізика. -- Одеський національний університет імені І.І. Мечникова, МОН України, Одеса, \the\year.

\vskip 15pt

Теоретичне вивчення електрофізичних властивостей статистично 
однорідних та ізотропних багатофазних дисперсних систем є 
нетривіальною та далекою від свого точного розв'язання задачею, 
оскільки характеристики таких систем, як правило, є результатом
дії різних структурних та фізико-хімічних факторів і механізмів.
Типовими прикладами останніх є: нерегулярність форми диспергованих 
частинок та їх дисперсія за розмірами; утворення областей 
просторового заряду навколо частинок (області високої концентрації 
дислокацій в твердих композитних електролітах; області 
аморфного полімеру в полімерних композитних електролітах; 
подвійний електричний шар в колоїдах); формування міжфазних 
шарів (оксидні оболонки на поверхні металевих частинок); 
неконтрольоване легування матриці тощо. Вже лише спроба 
включити їх в єдину модель системи є нетривіальною проблемою, яка після переходу до задачі гомогенізації додатково ускладнюється необхідністю врахування багаточастинкових поляризацій і кореляцій.

Існуючи методи вирішення таких задач можна умовно розділити на три класи: 1) числові симуляції; 2) математичні підходи; 3) методи, що базуються на класичних фізичних підходах. Числові методи дозволяють дуже

В даній роботі представлено замкнений теоретичний підхід [1] до опису квазістатичних коефіцієнтів провідності , діелектричної проникності  та діелектричних втрат  дисперсних систем із твердою матрицею. Мезоструктура системи моделюється в термінах моделі частинок з морфологією тверде ядро – проникна оболонка, диспергованих в однорідну матрицю. Оболонки є, у загальному випадку, електрично неоднорідними та підкоряються певним правилам домінування, що визначають локальні значення електричних параметрів у системі після перекривання оболонок з ядрами та матрицею. Властивості різних частин оболонок ефективно проявляються в різних концентраційних інтервалах, що дозволяє ефективно відобразити через них роль відповідних механізмів у формуванні перелічених коефіцієнтів на цих інтервалах. Електродинамічна гомогенізація моделі здійснюється в рамках методу компактних груп неоднорідностей (див., наприклад, [2]) без модельної деталізації поляризаційних і кореляційних процесів.

We present results [1-3], derived within the compact group
approach (CGA) which effectively incorporates many-particle
polarization and correlation effects, for the effective
quasistatic dielectric constant/elec\-tri\-cal conductivity of
model dispersions of hard-core--penetrable-shell particles
embedded in a continuous matrix. Both the cores and shells are
characterized by radially symmetrical distributions of their
electric parameters. The local properties of overlapping
constituents are governed by the distance from a given point to
the nearest particle.

Let $x$ be an electric parameter of a system $\cal{D}$ and $x_{\rm
	eff}$ its effective value. The key points behind [1-3] are as
follows:

(1) $\cal{D}$ is electrically equivalent to an auxiliary system
$\cal{S}$ formed by embedding $\cal{D}$'s constituents into a
uniform host with $x=x_{\rm f}$. $\cal{S}$ is a set of macroscopic
regions (compact groups) large enough to have the properties of
the entire $\cal{S}$, but point-like relative to the probing
field;  

(2) $x_{\rm eff}$ is found as the proportionality coefficient in
the relevant constitutive relation between the averaged
induction/current and field. These averages are expressed through
the statistical moments $\langle(x-x_{\rm f})^n\rangle$;

(3) Combining the CGA with the Hashin-Shtrikman variational
theorem or the boundary conditions for electric fields, $x_{\rm
	f}$ is proven to equal $x_{\rm eff}$. This result makes the
homogenization procedure internally closed;

(4) Finally, $x_{\rm eff}$, as a functional of $\cal{D}$'s
constituents? conductivities and volume concentrations, is shown
to obey an integral relation, rigorous in the quasistatic limit.

We demonstrate the validity of our results by: (a) contrasting
them with analytical and numerical results for dispersions of
graded dielectric spheres with power-law permittivity profiles;
(b) mapping them onto extensive random resistor network simulation
data for composite polymer electrolytes; and (c) applying them to
real composite electrolytes.



Ефективність підходу демонструється порівнянням його результатів з даними симуляцій  для композитних полімерних електролітів та експериментальними даними для , ,  композитів, утворених частинками термографіту, CuO, Fe2O3, Fe та Al в парафіні.

які перспективи




We present the basic ideas and further developments of a new many-particle homogenization theory [1] for the electrical parameters (quasistatic conductivity, dielectric permittivity, and dielectric loss coefficient) of statistically homogeneous and isotropic particulate systems. The system’s microstructure is formulated in terms of the model of hard-core–penetrable-shell spheres. The cores are associated with particles. The shells account for different types of interfacial and matrix effects and are in general inhomogeneous. The desired parameters are calculated using the compact groups approach (CGA) [2] and internally-closed homogenization procedure. The former allows one to efficiently estimate many-particle polarization and correlation contributions without explicit detailing of the processes involved. The latter follows immediately from the requirement that the CGA and the boundary conditions for the complex electric field be consistent.
The theory has been used to process experimental data [3] for paraffin-based dispersed systems with embedded semiconductor (Fe2O3, CuO) or conductor (thermographite, Fe, Al) filler particles. It proves to describe the experiment surprisingly well in the entire range of filler particle concentrations.  The physical nature of the effects incorporated by the shells is discussed. These may include: irregularities of particles’ shapes; contact resistance; formation and destruction of oxide layers; impurification of the host in the course of sample preparation; and others. 


It has been shown numerically [1] that the effective electrical conductivity of composite polymer electrolytes can be adequately described by considering such systems as dispersions of hard-core–penetrable-shell particles. The shells are introduced to account for the formation of highly conductive amorphous (with a decreased degree of crystallinity) regions around the filler particles. We use the compact-group approach [2,3] to give a self-consistent analytical solution to this model in the case where (a) the shells are inhomogeneous and characterized by an isotropic conductivity profile, and (b) the local value of the conductivity in the system is determined by the shortest distance from the point of interest to the nearest particle. The effective conductivity is expressed in terms of the constituents’ conductivities and volume concentrations; the latter are determined by the statistical microstructure of the system. Our theory effectively incorporates many-particle effects and is expected to be rigorous in the quasistatic limit. Using the well-tested statistical physics results for the shell volume concentration, we support this conclusion by mapping our solution on 3D random resistor network simulations [1]. Finally, we apply our theory to a number of real PEO- and OMPEO-based polymer electrolytes to describe the nontrivial behavior of their effective conductivities as functions of the filler concentration and temperature.






\vskip 15pt
\textbf{Ключові слова:} метод компактних груп, модель ядро-оболонка, провідність, діелектрична проникність, дисперсна система, перколяція, композитні електроліти, нанокомпозити, диференціальний підхід